HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan. Judy
Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight, two
Stories from the front lines of
the migrant crisis. Malcolm
Brabant is there as more
refugees land in Greece. And
William Brangham follows up with
two families now in Germany, one
finding refuge, the other more
uncertainty.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It is here, in
this social-hall-turned-refugee
camp, where they will likely
stay for months
as they wait for their asylum
applications to be approved.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead:
creating a new arts capital in
the middle of the City of
Angels. Jeffrey Brown looks
inside the new $140 million
museum that is the centerpiece.
JEFFREY BROWN: It features 30
galleries filled with big names
in modern and contemporary
art, Andy Warhol, Keith Haring,
Kara Walker, Jeff Koons, and
many others, including Jasper
Johns.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's
Friday. Mark Shields and David
Brooks are with us to analyze
the
week's news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Wall Street
worried away all of the week's
gains today, amid fears
of slowing growth worldwide. The
Federal Reserve had cited the
state of the world economy
yesterday
when it opted not to raise
interest rates. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 290
points today, to close back near
16380. The Nasdaq fell 66 points
and the S&P 500 slide
32. For the week, all three
indexes lost a fraction of a
percent.
Confusion reigned across
Southeastern Europe today, as
countries competed to move
desperate
migrants to each other's
territory. Croatia's government
announced it could not cope,
after
17,000 surged across its border
with Serbia in 48 hours. So, the
Croatians began moving
migrants into Hungary, which was
working to expand its razor wire
fence.
Jonathan Miller of Independent
Television News reports again
from the scene.
JONATHAN MILLER: The
dispossessed were dumped in no
man's land between Croatia and
Hungary
at 2:00 p.m. local time, brought
here in great convoys by buses
by the Croatians, unwanted,
unwelcome.
But this is a highly provocative
act. Neighboring Hungary has
made it abundantly clear that
it doesn't want these wayfarers
either. As Hungarian Humvees and
troop reinforcements
arrived, Hungary's foreign
minister accused Croatia of
encouraging masses of people to
commit the criminal offense of
illegally crossing its border.
Noor (ph) and her friends are
from Aleppo in Syria. After all
they have been through,
being caught in the middle of a
game of chicken between two E.U.
countries doesn't faze her.
The government of Hungary has
said that, if you cross, it is
illegal.
WOMAN: It's illegal. What
we do? Just stay and wait.
JONATHAN MILLER: A group of
asylum seekers, including a
family, broke away from the
Croatian
police and made off through a
field towards the frontier.
Police gave chase and rounded
them up, but suddenly the
atmosphere softened.
For all the bad blood between
these two fractious neighbors, a
fleet of Hungarian buses drove
into no man's land. It took ages
to load up, and it wasn't
exactly done in good grace,
but the burly Hungarian police
oversaw the whole operation. The
buses drove off.
The unwanted have been taken to
two registration centers close
to the Austrian border. Austrian
Interior Ministry said there had
been no coordination between
Budapest and Vienna. In
Tovarnik,
scene of yesterday's mayhem,
they continued to pour in from
Serbia right through night,
despite seven of eight border
crossings being closed by
Croatia. A train took 1,000 to
Zagreb.
But we found 3,000 people
standing for hours in searing
heat waiting for buses. They'd
all spent the night in the open.
The U.N. Refugee Agency says it
can't do anything until
they're asked to with specific
requests for assistance, which
they haven't had. This whole
situation is actually quite
manageable, its spokesman told
me. It's just they have no
clue how to do it.
WOMAN: We know how to do the
job, but the responsibility, the
moral and legal responsibility
here, is on the countries in the
European Union. What's missing
is a collective European
Union action. Countries have
been trying to do it on their
own and then, at some stage,
they say they can't. So they
need to do it together.
JONATHAN MILLER: E.U. leaders
won't meet until next Wednesday.
Croatia has thrown down the
gauntlet to Brussels today.
Hungary's furious and so are the
Serbs. Now everyone says they're
swamped.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will have
first-hand reports on either end
of this desperate journey,
Greece and Germany,
after the news summary.
In Pakistan, Taliban gunmen
killed 29 people when they
stormed an air force base in the
northwest. It was the militants'
deadliest strike yet at the
Pakistani military. Officials
said 16 of those killed were
worshipping at a mosque inside
the compound. The assault
triggered an hours-long gunfight
before the attackers were
killed.
The death toll hit 182 in South
Sudan a day after a fuel truck
erupted into a fire ball.
Hundreds more were being treated
for burns. The accident happened
west of the capital,
Juba, as people were siphoning
gas from the truck.
The United States and Russia
moved closer today to
military-to-military discussions
on Syria. It came amid fresh
reports of Russian tanks and
fighter jets arriving to support
the Assad regime.
In London, Secretary of State
John Kerry said President Obama
believes military talks are
an important next step. Kerry
met with the foreign minister
from the United Arab Emirates.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: We're looking for ways in
which to try to find a
common ground. Clearly, if
you're going to have a political
settlement, which we have
always argued is the best and
only way to resolve Syria, you
need to have conversations
with people and you need
to find the common ground.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
Defense Secretary Ash Carter
spoke by phone with his Russian
counterpart, a first step
toward direct military talks.
There's word the U.S. Marines
will ask to exclude women from
some front-line combat
jobs. The Associated Press
reports the Marines have made
that formal recommendation to
the
Navy secretary. It is in sharp
contrast to the Army, Navy and
Air Force. They are expected
to open all battlefield
positions to women.
Republicans in the U.S. House
voted today to block Planned
Parenthood's federal funding
for a year. Party leaders hoped
the votes would appease
conservatives, and persuade
them not to force a government
shutdown over the issue. The
debate was sparked by secretly
recorded videos of Planned
Parenthood officials discussing
how they harvest fetal tissue
for
research.
REP. DIANE BLACK (R), Tennessee:
Congressional investigations are
under way. But there are
more than enough lingering
questions to stop the flow of
money, taxpayer dollars, to this
abortion giant until
our work is complete.
REP. DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ
(D), Florida: As a woman,
mother, and breast cancer
survivor,
I refuse to take that threat
lying down. Republicans' own
investigations turned up
nothing. Yet
some of their members are
willing to risk women's lives
just to score political points.
Enough is enough.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Senate
Democrats have vowed to block
the bill in that chamber.
A South Carolina man is now
accused of failing to sound the
alarm before the church
shootings
in Charleston and lying about it
afterward. Joey Meek pleaded not
guilty today to charges
in a federal indictment. Meek
has said Dylann Roof told him he
was about to -- quote -- "do
something crazy," but knew no
specifics. The FBI now says that
was a lie. Nine people died
in the church attack.
The United States has handed
over one of China's most wanted
fugitives from corruption
charges.
He had been in this country
since 2001. State television
showed businessman Yang Jinjun
arriving back in China today and
being taken away in handcuffs to
face bribery and embezzlement
charges. Chinese officials
hailed the development.
MAN (through translator): The
successful repatriation of Yang
Jinjun is the result of the
close
communication and cooperation
between Chinese and U.S. law
enforcement authorities. This
marks major progress in
China-U.S. law enforcement
cooperation in pursuit of
corruption suspects.
We appreciate the efforts and
help that the U.S. government
provided.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the past,
the U.S. has been reluctant to
send fugitives back to China,
given its history of human
rights abuses. This new move
comes just days before President
Xi Jinping's first state
visit to Washington.
President Obama spoke with Cuban
President Raul Castro today,
ahead of the pope's visit
to both countries. The White
House says they discussed
efforts to restore ties during
the
phone call. It came on the same
day that the U.S. eased its
longtime embargo of Cuba. New
rules are designed to make it
easier for tourism, telephone
and Internet firms to establish
a presence in the island nation.
The Environmental Protection
Agency is accusing Volkswagen of
deliberately violating clean
air laws and ordering a halt. It
means fixing nearly half a
million V.W. and Audi diesel
cars made since 2008. They
contain so-called defeat devices
that activate emissions controls
only during official testing.
The systems are turned off
during normal driving. V.W.
could be fined more
than $18 billion.
And campaigning wrapped up today
in Greece ahead of Sunday's
general election with no
clear winner in sight. Leftist
Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras
resigned last month after
members
of his Syriza Party rebelled
against new austerity measures.
Today, preparations were under
way
to set up polling stations.
Municipal workers were busy
delivering voting booths, ballot
boxes and other supplies.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
two more takes on this great,
desperate migration;
Malcolm Brabant is there as more
refugees come ashore in Greece,
while William Brangham
reports from one of the
endpoints of the journey,
Germany; also, the analysis of
Mark Shields
and David Brooks, and
much, much more.
There are many way stations on
the long and hard march from the
killing fields of the
Middle East, North Africa and
Afghanistan. Many of those
perilous journeys stop over
on the Greek islands
off the Turkish coast.
Tonight, special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports from the
Greek isle of Lesbos, where
tens of thousands of refugees
and migrants have landed on
their uncertain voyage toward
Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Just after
dawn, and volunteers direct the
day's first arrivals to make the
five-mile crossing from Turkey.
The flimsy boat was spotted by
Englishman Eric Kempson,
a Lesbos resident, who's been up
at dawn every day for months to
shepherd the refugees to
safety. Kempson has inspired
other Europeans to help, at a
time when the E.U. is bitterly
divided over how to respond.
ERIC KEMPSON, Volunteer: Now
we're at 40, 45. The other day,
we had 50 boats. You know,
50 boats is 2,500 people. It's
absolutely crazy. And the amount
of accidents is unbelievable,
boats sinking, people in the
water. We're rescuing every
single day.
We're civilized people here in
Europe. And for these people to
have suffered the way
they have suffered, when you see
them get off the boats, they're
all elated and everything
else, and then you see them a
few hours or a few days later,
they're different people.
They don't know what the
hell is going on here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Today's sea
was kind. It isn't always.
How do you feel
about being here?
MAN: Happy.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Only a handful
of children were on the boat.
Most were men, whose first
thought was to phone home.
Kempson's wife, Philippa, has
noticed a clear trend.
PHILIPPA KEMPSON, Volunteer: The
last weeks, most of the Syrian
people are from Damascus,
and the stories we are hearing
is that they have hung on and
hung on. And now Damascus
is -- it's -- the war is
spreading to all the areas of
Damascus. So, they're leaving
really quickly now. These are
people that were in Damascus a
week ago.
So they're running really
quickly. So, it's nothing to do
with the numbers pulling them,
because they know how bad the
situation here is. They're very
media-savvy. They have their
phones. They're in contact with
people who've already come. They
know how bad it is. But
their -- what's the alternative?
They're not allowed to fly to
Europe. They have to make
this journey. We have forced
them into -- the more fences we
build, the more we force people
to make journeys like this.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's estimated
that 60 percent of those
crossing to Lesbos are from
Syria.
MAN: Life there, it's not good.
It's not healthy. Children, it's
not safe. Our home, it's not
safe. Everything is not safe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The next
biggest national group setting
out for Northern Europe comes
from Afghanistan, where fears
about of ongoing violence and
insecurity, driven by the
Taliban
and Islamic State, abound.
MAN: The most important point is
just the insecurity and
different bad situations that
forced us and others to leave
our homeland and hometown. And
just we want security, we
want a shelter in order to have
a better life in the future.
Our education is left incomplete
in our country. But we are
trying our best. And this is the
target and aim of our parents
also and others to pave the
ground of education for us, for
our small brothers.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The people
behind me are waiting for a bus
to take them to Mytilini,
which is Lesbos' main town. And
that's an improvement on when I
was here four months
ago, because they had to march
for two or three days to reach
the ports to catch a ferry
to Athens.
But the European Union's
inability to construct a
coherent policy to deal with
this crisis
means that the new arrivals have
many more difficulties than
those who have trodden this
road before. Getting to the
fringes of Greece is painfully
slow, but every day, new
obstacles
are being placed in their way in
the Balkans and Central Europe.
But their first impression of
Europe was one of kindness, as
they were greeted with food,
fluids and genuine concern. For
this child, the journey was
quickly forgotten in a slightly
surreal encounter on the beach.
This young Syrian recorded his
landfall for posterity.
He's making history. But the
scenes he will capture in the
coming days may not be so
peaceful.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Lesbos.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For many of
the people the "NewsHour"
correspondents and teams have
met,
their ultimate destination,
their promised land is Germany.
What was initially an open-door
policy has seen modifications,
as German authorities
have reinstituted border
controls, and draft legislation
would limit generous state
benefits
to only certain
refugee populations.
William Brangham updates on the
stories of two families he first
met in Hungary. Tonight,
we meet them in Germany, where
their lives have taken, for now,
very different turns.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: While refugees
and migrants have clashed
violently with police on the
Hungarian border this week,
their attempts to enter into
Europe are, for many of them,
just the beginning of a
much longer journey.
Last week, we followed two
Syrian families along the
grueling, unpredictable
migration
from the Middle East towards
Germany. Both suffered sleepless
nights, chaotic border
crossings, and a maze of
ever-changing rules and
challenges.
Now, only a week later,
so much had changed.
HAMEED YAKDI, Refugee (through
translator): It's a good
feeling. After a long, hard
effort
and great risk, we arrived here.
Thank God that we made it here.
It's a very strange
feeling.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hameed Yakdi
and his family from Syria were
lucky in many ways. Not only
did they make it through Hungary
before this week's violence
broke out and the sealing
of the border, but, in Austria,
they met Hameed's brother,
Muhammaed, who immigrated to
Germany
two years ago, and helped guide
them the rest of the way.
HAMEED YAKDI (through
translator): I felt safe the
moment I reached Germany. I have
a family that welcomed and
helped me. I have not had to
struggle. When I ask, they
answer
right away. They have lived here
a long time, and they make me
feel at home.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But many of
the tens of thousands of
refugees who've already arrived
in Germany are not quite as
lucky. We last saw Majdoleen
Diab exhausted, bedding down
for the night with her husband
and daughter in a warehouse on
the Austria-Hungary border.
At that point, they'd traveled
thousands of miles by boat and
train, car and foot.
But now, a week later, they have
finally arrived in Germany.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB, Refugee: The
journey, it's very hard. You
see. We need a month for rest.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Their
2-year-old daughter, Maral (ph),
was sick with a cold from the
road, but at least they now
had time to sleep it off.
Soon after arriving in Germany,
the Diabs were transferred north
by German authorities
to a small town on the Czech
border. Majdoleen says they were
afraid they were being deported.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: We are opening
GPS, oh, oh, we are near the
Czech. We are near the Czech.
We think -- he give them to
Czech. We are worried. But we
were -- arrived. It's a very,
very wonderful village.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It is here, in
this
social-hall-turned-refugee-camp,
where they will likely stay for
they wait for their asylum
applications to be approved.
This is now home to about 100
asylum seekers from various
countries and backgrounds. All
were given I.D. bracelets,
and for now, instructions
to simply stay put.
Juliane Scheer is a German
asylum lawyer in Munich.
JULIANE SCHEER, Asylum Lawyer:
For the first three months,
people have to live in certain
refugee centers. And, from
there, they are distributed.
They have a special legal
status. They cannot be deported,
but they also have certain
restrictions,
for example, for the place where
they can live. They cannot just
look for -- for work
or they cannot just look for an
apartment. They have to stay in
these refugee camps.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: It's hard.
Waiting, it's hard, because we
haven't know what we are waiting
now. We have breakfast, stay
about one hour, taking shower,
eating lunch, and stay, not
-- not important.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Back in
Munich, the Yakdi family is now
staying with extended family,
and they may eventually have to
go through the same process and
move away. Their cousin
Ruaa has been through it before.
She came to Germany 15 years ago
as a refugee from
Saddam Hussein's Iraq.
RUAA ADNA SULAIMAN, Yakdi Family
Cousin: They have to be patient.
And they have to bear
everything they will be facing.
It's not hunger. It's not
unsafety. It's -- everything is
offered
for them here. But the
procedures, it will take time,
and some people give up so
quickly.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hameed's
brother, Muhammaed, came from
Syria two years ago. In
alternating
English, Arabic and German, he
explained his reasons for
immigrating.
MAN (through translator): When
my brother asked me the first
time, he wanted to come
to Germany. I said, come, but
not for you, for the children.
Here, your children can
learn, study better, better than
even in our country when we
didn't have war. Here, it
is better than our country. We
have to say that, better
learning, studying, a better
life.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: While she
waits to begin a new life with
her family, Majdoleen Diab
has already started learning
German. The German government
says they will grant asylum to
virtually all Syrian applicants,
but the process could still take
months.
She says they're committed to
starting a new life here. She
wants to go back to being a
hairdresser, and Ahmad wants to
return to work again in metal
fabrication. And, most
importantly, they want little
Maral to get to school.
AHMAD DIAB, Refugee (through
translator): Once I start
working, I can build a new
future
here. At least my daughter gets
an education and can finish her
schooling.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Maral will go
to a German school, read German
books, have German friends.
And while they're grateful to be
here, Majdoleen says that, in
many ways, her daughter will
grow up in a very
different world.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: It's very hard,
because the person, he leaves
his country and his parents,
his friends, his memories,
everything. In Syria, we had
noise and many people and many
cafe and many everything. And we
had the neighbors. We had
friends. We had everything. But,
here,
we feel lonely, lonely here.
We leave our country for her
future. We need a future for my
daughter. And our country
now, we haven't future there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There are many
challenges ahead for the
thousands of refugees who have
already arrived in Germany and
other European countries. But,
for most of them, the first
challenge is to wait.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
our phones have become the new
election battleground;
a new modern arts center for the
City of Angels; plus, using
humor to tackle issues of race,
our Brief But Spectacular
chat with Baratunde Thurston.
But, first, the second
Republican debate is in the
books, so what's next for the
candidates?
Is Donald Trump reopening the
discussion about where President
Obama was born? And Pope Francis
is making a historic visit to
U.S., with stops at the White
House and Capitol Hill.
To the analysis of Shields and
Brooks, we go. That's syndicated
columnist Mark Shields
and New York Times
columnist David Brooks.
All right, David, I
want to start with you.
This debate has happened now.
Who has won, who has lost kind
of happened last night.
We have been talking about that
for a while. But who capitalizes
on this going forward?
Who is actually able to use this
to leverage more fund-raisers?
Because that's going to
become more important in
the next couple of months.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first, I
have been predicting for 37
straight weeks that Donald Trump
will
fade.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And I could be
wrong this time. But I'm
confident. So I may be wrong,
but
I'm confidently wrong, that I
think he's going to begin to
fade, in part because I think
he's gotten a little boring
and also a little hapless.
He can afford to look offensive.
He can afford to look
distasteful. He can't afford to
be
boring or incompetent, because
his mastery is the whole basis
of his campaign. So, I'm
feeling a slide.
So, we will see.
As for the risers, it's no
accident. It's no -- not
controversial. Carly Fiorina, if
you're on stage with 11 people,
one of the acts of genius you
have to have is the ability
to create a signature moment
that can be broadcast and
rebroadcast. She has that. She
has both
the creativity to create those
moments with some nice
phraseology and also the
passion.
And so she's clearly, I think,
rising to the top tier. This is
a party that does -- I do
not think, at the end of the
day, they do not want crazy, so
I don't think they want
Trump. They also don't want
Milquetoast. They don't want
vanilla. And Jeb Bush, I'm
afraid,
is sort of stuck in
pseudo-vanilla land.
And so they're going to want --
I think Fiorina is right up
there and I think Marco Rubio
would be the other one, bit of
an outsider, a genius for taking
complicated situations
and explaining them in a way
that is clear, without being
oversimplified. And so I think
you have those two, Fiorina and
Rubio, who will get the biggest
boosts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
besides those two, Mark, who
takes this to the bank and
makes a convincing case to
people with deep pockets?
MARK SHIELDS: Is the debate
over? I'm not sure that CNN was
going to give up that audience.
It just -- it kept going
into extra innings.
Hari, I don't disagree with
David certainly about Carly
Fiorina. She was the consensus
breakthrough winner. She did
several things. She did have the
signature moment, as David
mentioned, but she was also
fact-specific. In other words,
people argue the facts and
question some of the facts, but
running against Donald Trump,
who is a substance-free
candidate
and would -- avoids issues like
a T-shirt, the reality is that
it gave her a particular
standing.
The, also, advantage she had is,
she took that insult of Trump's
and turned it on him
in an organic fashion. She
didn't -- in other words, she
didn't come in, and this is --
grew
right out of the event itself,
out of the debate, and it came
to her, and she grabbed
that moment where Trump had
mentioned remembering Jeb Bush's
comment on cutting women's
health.
And just as women -- just as Mr.
Trump remembers Jeb Bush's
comment, women will remember
what
he said. So I think, in that
sense, we're always looking for
something shiny, fresh
and new in the press. And voters
are to some degree and this
year. And I think she fills
that niche.
I think that John Kasich, the
governor of Ohio, missed an
opportunity. He dwelled on
his 18 years in Congress, which
is not a credential that people
are looking in this outsider
year.
I thought Marco Rubio was
incredibly competent. He spoke
in complete sentences, complete
paragraphs.
His text was good.
He's too senatorial. And that's
the problem. If you look at his
language and presentation,
it comes across as too
senatorial. Again, voters are
not looking for a senator. And
I just think Jeb Bush was -- it
wasn't working for him. It
wasn't natural. His
confrontation
over his -- the insult by Trump
to his wife, he backed down. And
I just didn't think he
had a good -- Scott Walker, the
governor of Wisconsin, had to
reassure his donors afterwards.
And it hadn't gone well.
That was -- the indication was
that by -- he attacked the
press. He attacked CNN,
criticized
them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, there was
a recent moment where a voter
asked Trump a question, and
implicit in that question was
the birthplace of President
Obama. We're going to go ahead
and play a clip of that and also
a reaction from Hillary Clinton.
And we will talk about
some other reactions. Let's
just go to the tape.
MAN: We have a problem in this
country. It's called Muslims. We
know our current president
is one. You know he's
not even an American.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: We need this
question. This is the first
question.
(CROSSTALK)
MAN: But, anyway, we have
training camps growing where
they want to kill us.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to be
looking at a lot of different
things.
And a lot of people are saying
that, and a lot of people are
saying that bad things are
happening out there. We're going
to be looking at that and plenty
of other things.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: I would,
you know, call on him and call
on
all of the candidates to stop
this descent into the kind of
hateful, mean-spirited, divisive
rhetoric that we have seen too
much of in the last months.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, Mark, the
Hillary reaction is almost
predictable. But other
Republican
candidates came out
against this as well.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
Chris Christie on "The Today
Show" this morning said --
criticized
it and said he would not have
done it. Lindsey Graham was even
more vocal on an Andrea Mitchell
interview today.
To me, this is -- Barack Obama
is a Christian who was born in
Hawaii. Barack Obama is a
Christian who was born in
Hawaii. I mean, what we have is
feeding paranoia. Right now,
43 percent of Republicans,
according to CNN's latest poll,
believe Barack Obama is a
Muslim;
54 percent of Trump supporters
in the same survey believe he
is.
Donald Trump has stirred this,
he's sustained it, he's
exploited it. This is a real
character
check, and it's a character
defect, if you don't stand up
and say this is unacceptable
and it shall not stand.
If a Republican cannot criticize
Donald Trump on this -- on these
grounds of not rejecting
and rebutting something so
outrageous and indefensible as
-- in this question, then
they just ought to
withdraw from public life.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes,
I sort of agree.
You would hope that everybody in
this day and age has sort of a
bigotry response, that
when somebody says something
clearly bigoted, like Muslims
are a problem in this country,
that you have a response, and
the response is one of visceral
disgust, and you would
hope we would hear something
said about African-Americans,
Latinos, black -- women,
whatever group it
is -- and he somehow
didn't have that response.
And, in contrast to John McCain,
four years ago -- four years
ago, had a similar question,
and he did have that response:
Oh, that's a man of honor.
And one of the things that's
interesting to me about Trump is
99 percent of businesspeople
are people of business, but also
people of honor. And so they
don't check their values
or their principles at the door
when they do their business
deals.
So, when you hear Trump talk
about his business, oh, I bought
that politician, I bought that
politician, I contributed to
them, I contributed to them, the
only thing that matters is the
outcome, is the bottom line, the
revenue thing. And that carries
over into the way he talks
about politics.
He evaluates politicians, he
evaluates policies and he
evaluates events by the polling
data.
And if you have got no
qualitative, no moral calculus
going on in your head and you're
all just looking at the numbers,
well, then you get this sort of
moral obtuseness and
no reaction to what was
clearly a bigoted statement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
Now to someone who has a clearly
moral compass paying a visit to
the United States, the pope,
really, in several ways, I think
reintroducing the world to the
idea that this position has
transformative power in it.
And that doesn't necessarily sit
well with everyone. I was doing
a Periscope earlier,
kind of behind-the-scenes look,
and someone says, how do you
feel about the pope rewriting
the Ten Commandments, right?
There are many people around the
world who think perhaps
this progressiveness
is too much.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, the pope,
Pope Francis, is coming to
Washington. He's never been to
Washington, never been to the
United States before. We know
we're the center of the
universe.
Somehow, it has escaped
him in his entire life.
But several things. One is, he's
the antithesis to big-money
politics. I mean, this is
somebody
who spends his time with -- he
listens to the voiceless. He
remembers the forgotten.
He sees the overlooked, whether
it's the immigrant, or the
refugee, as we saw, or the day
worker,
or the sick, the
handicapped, or the lonely.
I mean, he really does -- he
does embody -- I fear he's going
to make both parties -- I
know he's going to make both
parties very uncomfortable,
because his message is not
trimmed for politics. He's going
to make the Republicans quite
uncomfortable on the question
of poverty and the obligation
that we have to act
collectively. He's very
pro-politics.
He believes in politics.
He's very strong on the
environment and on climate
change, contrary to many
Republicans,
including Marco Rubio. But, at
the same time, he speaks fondly
and well and consistently
about protecting the unborn and
those in the late stages of life
who face death. He is
-- really, it's going to be
remarkable to watch Joe Biden
and John Boehner, both
Catholics,
the vice president and the
speaker, sitting behind him, and
applauding different passengers
and kind of pretending
they didn't hear others.
So -- but I hope it doesn't
become political, because this
truly is a remarkable spiritual
moment in a very secular city.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I just want
to underline that last comment.
I hope we don't overpoliticize
this visit.
The first thing we're going to
see is our countrymen,
thousands, millions of them
moved
by faith, their eyes looking to
heaven, their heart warmed by
God's love. And we're going
to see that in public. And we're
going to see that in tens of
millions of people. And
that will be a moment of seeing
faith in a way we rarely see it
in this country in public.
And, secondly, we will see the
example of the man. The message
is the person. It's the
way he conducts himself. His
love for the poor is not out of
any self-congratulatory.
He -- whether you're Jewish,
Muslim, atheist, whatever, he is
the embodiment of the Christian
virtues that I think we all
admire, the -- seeing the
meekest, seeing the poorest,
seeing the
lowest, and lifting them up, and
seeing the brokenness in people,
and then lifting them
up with joy.
And so, to me, it will be a
theater of spiritual -- a
spiritual theater more than a
political
theater. And I suspect tens of
thousands, hundreds of thousands
of people's lives will
be changed, in the way that
politics can never change them,
from within. Their lives will
be transformed because they will
be at this visit. And they will
be moved by something
they had never felt or only
have felt weakly before.
And to me, that's just a seismic
event, whatever happens to our
political culture.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, so what
about -- how does that translate
when that spiritual theater
is finished? Does that translate
into any sort of policy action
or rethinking something
that might be in the works
in Congress that's stalled?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I hope it
transforms hearts. And I hope it
transforms hearts in the ways
Mark just suggested.
The pope is not going to visit
the homeless or the prisoners
once in his visit. He's doing
it six, seven, eight times in
the visit. So, the constant
focus will be there on those
who are hurting the most. And I
think that enlivened attention
will carry over into people's
eyes, both in their private
lives and their private giving,
but also in their public lives.
Mark has said this many times
over the years. We have a
political culture focused on the
middle class. We have lost some
of the contact with the poor,
some of the contact with the
needy, and not only -- and not
from high to low, and, frankly,
some of the compassionate
conservatism and some of
progressivism has been from high
to low, but treating the poor
as those closest to God and
worthy of respect maybe even
more than everybody else.
And that's an attention that has
been absent from our political
culture or in short supply,
and maybe it will be in
slightly bigger supply.
MARK SHIELDS: I think David said
it very, very well, just that
wherever he goes, he
brings the cameras with him, and
an incredible number of cameras,
as we know.
But as soon as he finishes
Congress -- and it's the hottest
ticket in the history of
Capitol Hill. I mean, people are
fighting to get in. Former
members and senators can't
even get into the gallery to
hear him. They have set up a
JumboTron outside.
He's going to have lunch with
the poorest of the poor in the
Center City in Washington
sponsored by Catholic Charities.
I mean, these are the addicted.
These are people with alcohol
problems, with psychological
problems, the homeless. And he
doesn't allow us to look
away. He forces us to examine
those who are living on the
outskirts of hope.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thanks so much for joining us.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As you heard,
presidential campaigns are
ramping up their rhetoric along
with ads and events. But one of
the most intense fights under
way is happening off camera.
Our political director, Lisa
Desjardins, reports on the 2016
battle taking place on our
computers
and phones.
LISA DESJARDINS: With all the
gentility of a marching band,
the presidential campaign
is under way and booming. But
like much of America, you may
think the 2016 presidential
fight has yet to really
enter your life.
Do you think any of the
campaigns are paying any
attention to you right now?
WOMAN: Not really, no.
MAN: Very little.
WOMAN: Not a whole lot.
MAN: Probably almost zero.
WOMAN: Not really, no.
LISA DESJARDINS: And last
question, do you have a cell
phone?
WOMAN: Of course.
MAN: Yes, I do.
WOMAN: I do.
MAN: Yes, I have a cell phone.
It's a very big part of my life
because I do a lot with
my cell phone.
LISA DESJARDINS: If you have a
smartphone -- and two-thirds of
us in America do, according
to the Pew Research Center --
you are already on the radar for
most 2016 campaigns. That's
because campaigns left and right
are now amassing more and more
data about voters, and they're
trying to influence you this
time around using this.
STEPHANIE CUTTER, Former Obama
Deputy Campaign Manager: The
ability for campaigns now to
target individuals on their
mobiles with customized,
individualized advertising, it's
remarkable.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's
Stephanie Cutter. You may
recognize her as a former
spokeswoman
for President Obama. In 2012,
she and team Obama won a
national campaign by
dramatically
expanding their data operation,
turning out troves of voters by
transforming millions
of pieces of their personal
data into a targeted campaign.
Now everyone is upping their
digital game, including super
PACs. Traditional on-stage
debates have given way to
digital face-offs on Twitter.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Yes, they broke the
law, but it's not a felony.
LISA DESJARDINS: And Instagram.
Two weeks ago, Donald Trump's
Instagram feed contained
three anti-Bush attack ads. How
did he respond? Bush put up a
YouTube video, of course,
questioning
Trump's GOP loyalty.
QUESTION: Then why are
you a Republican?
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: I have no idea.
LISA DESJARDINS: But the bigger
digital battle is quieter at
places like Precision Strategies
in Washington, founded by some
Obama veterans. The firm is
working now for the Clinton
campaign.
And their next cyber-land of
opportunity is the cell phone.
The number of Americans with
smartphones has leapt by an
estimated 660 million people in
just the three years since the
2012 election to roughly 200
million now. About as many
Americans are on Facebook. Of
course, that includes some kids
not old enough to vote,
but it is still a voter data
gold mine, and campaigns are
working to connect that Facebook
information to public
information about how often you
vote and to your cell phone, all
that with the goal of targeting
you at the right time with the
right ad.
This is one reason campaign Web
sites all ask, first thing, for
your e-mail.
STEPHANIE CUTTER: If somebody
signs up on your Web site to get
information from your
campaign, that's easily
matchable to Facebook, to
Twitter and a whole host of
other platforms.
So your complete online identity
can quickly be known to the
campaign. And they can
communicate
with you through all these
different touch points, with
your permission, of course.
LISA DESJARDINS: In this,
Facebook is critical. Last
month, the company sponsored a
Republican
debate and set up this lounge
for reporters. Recently, the
company made it easier to track
some voter information, opening
up its huge universe of data for
campaigns to exploit.
ANDY STONE, Policy
Communications Manager,
Facebook: There are now 193
million people
on the platform every month.
That's more than there are
registered voters in this
country.
So, there's a whole team of
people at Facebook that work
with not only campaigns, but
also
elected officials, advocacy
organizations, to help them use
the platform as effectively
as they possibly can to reach
the people that they are trying
to reach.
LISA DESJARDINS: But
Facebook has competition.
NICK SCHAPER, President, Engage:
A lot of folks are talking about
Snapshot.
LISA DESJARDINS: Nick Schaper
runs the Republican-leaning
strategy firm Engage. He's
talking about Snapchat,
an app is changing cell phone
use, especially for young
people. Don't understand it?
This is how Snapchat works,
quick videos like this one that
you personalize with text.
Then the videos or photos
disappear, either immediately or
the next day. The idea has
caught fire. Now Snapchat has
launched a news division,
curating the best videos and
photos
from people around the country
into one story that can get
millions of views. Take the
Republican
debate in August. Twice as many
18-to-24-year-olds watched that
debate through Snapchat than
on TV.
NICK SCHAPER: It's not only
being able to connect with the
younger generation, but in
using just a new medium that
gives them some new advertising
opportunities and new marketing
opportunities and paid promotion
opportunities to reach voters,
is going to be pretty powerful.
LISA DESJARDINS: Campaigns are
racing to harness that power. In
the meantime, voters, watch
your smartphones.
Lisa Desjardins, "PBS
NewsHour," Washington.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Los Angeles'
cultural scene is about to get a
big new showcase for
contemporary
art. A new museum opens this
weekend featuring the work of
major artists from the past six
decades, all from the private
collection of a longtime arts
patron.
Jeffrey Brown takes us
there for a preview.
JEFFREY BROWN: Billionaire art
collector Eli Broad still
remembers how he managed to
acquire
this early painting by modern
master Roy Lichtenstein.
ELI BROAD, Art Collector: A
Parisian collector wanted a lot
of money for it. I wasn't going
to pay that. So what I did is, I
wrote a check for X-million
dollars and said, you could
take the check, send me
the art, or tear it up.
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
ELI BROAD: And we ended
up with the art.
JEFFREY BROWN: Not something
that most of us can do, but Eli
Broad can and has for more
than four decades. The results
can now be seen in the brand-new
$140 million Broad MDNM Museum
in Los Angeles.
Designed by the firm of Diller
Scofidio and Renfro, it features
an outer honeycomb veil
that allows natural light to
filter in, a floor for storage
of art works that visitors
can peer into, and 30 galleries
filled with big names in modern
and contemporary art,
Andy Warhol, Keith Haring, Kara
Walker, Jeff Koons, and many
others, including Jasper Johns.
A number of these, I
understand, were in your home.
ELI BROAD: They were indeed.
WOMAN: Sorry about that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, why that
-- why do you make that face?
ELI BROAD: Well, I decided we
want the best work to be shown
in public, so we stripped
a lot of work off our walls. I
want it seen by the largest
audience possible.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a long way
from Eli Broad's modest
childhood home in Detroit,
where, he
says, there was no
art on the walls.
The son of Jewish Lithuanian
immigrants, Broad graduated from
Michigan State University,
married Edye Lawson, and started
a business building tract homes
in the suburbs of Detroit.
It grew into KB Homes, one of
the nation's largest
homebuilders. He later created
SunAmerica,
a large investment company. It
all propelled Broad onto the
Forbes list of wealthiest people
in the world. Last year, his net
worth was estimated at over $7
billion.
He is a major philanthropist in
education and medicine, as well
as the arts, one known
for keeping a strong, even
controlling hand in his various
projects.
ELI BROAD: We pledged to give 75
percent of our wealth away
during our lifetime.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you're sort
of smiling as you say that. Do
you -- is it fun, a fun
thing to do, to give it away?
ELI BROAD: I see it as
investment, rather than just
charity.
JEFFREY BROWN: What's the
investment? What do you mean,
investment in what?
ELI BROAD: You want a return in
education. You want to see
scientific and medical research
breakthroughs. And the art, you
want to share it with the
broadest possible public to get
more people interested in art.
JOANNE HEYLER, Director/Chief
Curator, Broad Museum: This is a
work by Los Angeles artist
Robert Therrien.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Broads began
collecting art in the 1970s, and
for the last 26 years
have relied on the professional
advice of curator Joanne Heyler,
who will now serve
as director of the new museum.
She showed me one of the more
whimsical pieces in the
collection.
So, under the table, it's a
child's-eye view or something?
JOANNE HEYLER: It does feel like
a child's-eye view, an almost
"Alice in Wonderland"
experience.
JEFFREY BROWN: Over time, the
Broads acquired 2,000 works of
art, adding a new piece almost
every week. And the collection
has long functioned as a kind of
lending library, with some 8,000
loans to more than 500
art institutions.
Heyler says it's been rapid-fire
buying, but always with an eye
toward a public mission.
JOANNE HEYLER: We're deep
investors in an artist's work,
so we really want to know what
we're getting into when we buy.
JEFFREY BROWN: Investors in the
sense of -- not as in buying it
to make money, but...
JOANNE HEYLER: Investors in the
sense of art history, investors
in the sense of trying
to promote their work to the
public, not in any financial
sense.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you feel
that's a big role, to be part of
art history? Is it that grand,
in a sense?
JOANNE HEYLER: Well, you shoot
for that. You aspire for that.
And, again, when you're in
the realm of contemporary art,
you can't be sure. And you have
to like not being sure
all the time.
MARK BRADFORD, Artist: I
like these snap lines.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the
artists the Broads have
collected in depth is Mark
Bradford,
who we visited in his huge
studio in an industrial part of
South Los Angeles. His Scorched
Earth
painting, about the aftermath of
the L.A. riots, is featured in
the inaugural exhibit
at the museum.
As a young artist just out of
grad school, Bradford said, he'd
heard of the Broads, but:
MARK BRADFORD: It was all just
folklore to me, the Broads, the
Broad collection.
JEFFREY BROWN: You didn't
know what that meant.
MARK BRADFORD: I didn't know. I
probably -- probably, the first
time said the Broad, I probably
said the Broad.
JEFFREY BROWN: Years later, he
says this of the Broads'
influence:
MARK BRADFORD: I think it's
important when collectors
collect in depth of an artist,
because you don't feel like
they're just doing baseball
cards: I have one of this and
one
of this and one of this. You
really feel like they're
committed to your work over the
long
period. And that, for me, means
something, because you can see
your growth in the work.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Oh, really?
MARK BRADFORD: Sure. You go, oh,
that was good, or, whoa, I'm a
little bit better. Oh.
But you can see that...
JEFFREY BROWN: Just
looking in one place.
MARK BRADFORD: One place.
JEFFREY BROWN: In
his collection.
L.A. Times art critic
Christopher Knight applauds that
kind of long-term commitment,
but wishes
the overall collection reached
beyond so-called blue-chip art
and deeper into what's been
produced in Los Angeles.
CHRISTOPHER KNIGHT, Art Critic,
The Los Angeles Times: The
primary limitation of the
collection
is that it's a market-driven
collection, which is a very
narrow sliver of the very active
art world of the last 30 years.
And I wish it had a greater
representation of art that
has been produced
in Los Angeles.
There is nowhere to go where one
can see the evolution of the
development of art in Los
Angeles. There isn't one.
And there should be.
JEFFREY BROWN: Eli Broad,
though, is obsessed with
developing L.A. as a leading
capital
of the art world. The new
building is part of an arts
district he's helped create,
stretching
along Grand Avenue in downtown
Los Angeles, and including
Disney Concert Hall and the
Museum of Contemporary Art.
What was the idea
that you wanted to...
(CROSSTALK)
ELI BROAD: The ideal one is to
create a vibrant center for a
region of 14 million people.
And I consider this to be the
regional cultural and civic
center for the region of 14
million
people.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which
it didn't have?
ELI BROAD: It did
not have before.
JEFFREY BROWN: Whether the new
Broad helps further that vision
for downtown is one of
the big question marks as
it opens this weekend.
From Los Angeles, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to our
regular feature Brief But
Spectacular.
Tonight, author and comedian
Baratunde Thurston on using
humor to educate and skewer
racism
with satire.
BARATUNDE THURSTON,
Author/Comedian: When you are
the black friend in your circle
of
people, that means you're the
one black person that these
friends have, you're kind of
like
a double agent, and you help
prevent all-out thermonuclear
war.
Nailed it.
I grew up in the Columbia
Heights neighborhood of
Washington, D.C., before it was
flooded
by white people. I was raised by
my mother alone. My father was
killed when I was 7 or
8 years old. And my mom worked
for the government, no college
degree, very self-taught, the
most
resourceful and intelligent
person I have ever known.
In college, I started writing a
satirical e-mail newsletter. And
I got very frustrated
that my peers at Harvard
University didn't know anything
about what was going on in the
world. So, I'm like, yes, we're
paying 38 bagillion dollars a
second to be here. You
should know what's going on in
Sri Lanka. And I took it upon
myself to educate my peers
with less stridency
and more hilarity.
I served at The Onion for about
five years as political editor
and director of digital
strategy. And for the most part,
I was the black people at The
Onion. The Onion does
a lot of great photo art, so I
played the part of a lot of
other black people in the
Photoshop job. I was the mayor
of Detroit. I was all three
Supremes. I was President
Obama's hand, and I wrote, like,
executive orders with that hand.
It was powerful.
The book "How to Be Black" is
mostly a memoir, and it's
peppered with satirical lessons
that
I have learned along the way,
how to be the black employee,
how to be the black friend,
how to be the next
black president.
If a white person is holding a
book called "How to Be Black,"
they're like, oh, you poor
thing. Like, you think a book is
going to change this for you?
But if a black person
is holding it, they're like, oh,
you poor thing. Do you need a
refresher course? And
so I'm glad to have offered
that into the world.
Racism is an absurd act in our
history as well. And so,
sometimes, we have got to come
at it sideways, come at it
comedically to try to move
forward politically.
My name is Baratunde Thurston.
This is my Brief But Spectacular
take on how to be black.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online right now: An
outdoor lab devoted to measuring
the effects of sea level rise
shows troubling results, the
accelerated poisoning of
freshwater
wetlands that keep our water
clean. Read more about the wild
side of sea level rise on our
Science page.
And on our World page, we take
you around the globe in five
questions. Test your news
knowledge with our new weekly
quiz. All that and more is on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later this evening.
Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: Now, with two
debates under their belts, we
take a look at where the
Republican
candidates go from here. Does
Donald Trump still ride high?
Can Carly Fiorina capitalize
on a strong night? Can Jeb Bush
and Scott Walker bounce back?
That's tonight on
"Washington Week" -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On "PBS
NewsHour Weekend" Saturday, we
begin a six-part series, "Time
for School," about the fight for
education around the world.
We begin with a
story from Kenya.
NARRATOR: Joab Onyando's (ph)
family could never afford
tuition for school, until 2003,
when Kenya makes primary school
free for the first time in
nearly 30 years.
MAN: Good morning, school.
STUDENTS: Good morning.
NARRATOR: More than a million
new students flood the system.
Joab (ph) is 10 and his
brother Gerald (ph) is 7 when
they begin first grade, walking
to school each day through
the sprawling Nairobi slum
they call home, Kibera. Their
class has 74 students
and one teacher.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's
tomorrow night on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with a look at who is
Pope Francis ahead of his
first U.S. visit.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.